Using UmpleOnline
User Manual

@@description

<p>The following describes how to use the <a 
href="http://try.umple.org">UmpleOnline tool accessible online at 
try.umple.org</a></p>

<p><b>Loading and saving</b></p>

<ul>

<li><b>To explore examples of Umple</b>, In the centre pane, click on 
'LOAD & SAVE'. You can load a pre-prepared example from the 'LOAD' 
menu.</li>

<br />

<li><b>To restart UmpleOnline</b> (you will lose any work you have not 
saved), click 'Start Over'</li>

<br />

<li><b>To enable saving of your work</b>, click 'Bookmarkable URL' above 
the left pane or in the centre pane and copy or bookmark the URL that 
appears in your browser's URL bar. Note that from this point on you can 
keep editing the Umple code or diagram, and your work will continue to be 
saved at this URL. You are thus saving your work in the 'cloud'. You can 
embed the URL in other pages to document your product. Note that at the 
current time, anyone who knows your URL can also edit your work, and if 
you forget your URL, there is no way to retrieve it. Therefore it is also 
suggested that you copy and paste the text of important files somewhere 
else. One thing to note is that if you just copy the visible text in the 
left hand pane, you will <u>not</u> be saving the <i>layout of the 
diagram</i>. If you want to save this too, you have to do one of the 
following:
  <ul>
     <li>Click on Options/Source in the center pane, to generate a popup 
that also contains the layout information.
     <li>Click on Options/Layout Editor in the center pane to view a 
separate window containing the layout, and then save the 
automatically-generated layout information separately. You can actually 
edit this layout textually, but we suggest you only do that if you are an 
expert since it us much easier to edit the layout from the right-hand 
graphical pane, as described later.
  </ul>
</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Left Pane: Umple textual code</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Type any Umple code into this pane. Three seconds after you stop 
typing, your program will be interpreted by Umple, and Umple will attempt 
to draw a corresponding class diagram in the right-hand side. Just about 
the simplest Umple program you could type here would be class X {}</li>

<br />

<li><b>If you make a mistake</b>, you can click 'Undo' in the centre pane, 
repeatedly to 'back out' each change you made. You can also redo changes 
in a similar manner.</li>

<br />

<li><b>You can hide this pane entirely</b> by unchecking 'Text Editor' in the 
center pane.</li>

<br />

<li><b>If you are doing a lot of text editing</b>, and don't want to have 
the diagram generated all the time, you can click on Options/Manual Sync 
in the center pane.</li>

<br />

<li><b>Current limitations</b>: The text pane currently has no syntax 
highlighting. If you make a syntax error the diagram on the right 
currently disappears, and you won't be able to generate code, or you will 
generate code that treats most of your text as 'extra code' that it passes 
to the Java/PHP/Ruby compiler to see if it can get that to process it. 
Improving these issues is on the Umple project to-do list. Meanwhile, if 
your program has an error, we suggest saving it somewhere and then pasting 
in small bits of it into the editor until you can find the part that gives 
the error.

</ul>


<p><b>Right Pane: UML diagram</b></p>

<ul>

<li><b>To add a class</b>, click on the Tools/Class command in the center pane, 
then position the cursor over the canvas. To add a whole series of 
classes, double-click on the Tools/Class command and click repeatedly on 
the canvas. Press escape if you change your mind and you don't want to add 
a class.</li>

<br />

<li>You can also use the text (left) pane to write Umple code that will 
appear on the canvas. If you do this, you will have to then lay out the 
diagram, since the layout algorithm is rather simple.</li>

<br />

<li><b>To rename a class</b>, click on the class name and type over it, then hit 
enter or click somewhere else. Alternatively edit it on the text (left) 
pane.</li>

<br />

<li><b>To reposition classes,</b> you can drag classes around to align 
them the way you like. You can also select a class and use the arrow keys 
to move it by a small amount in any direction. This is nice to carefully 
arrange classes. Note that the positions of your classes are saved in a 
hidden text pane on the left hand side. See the discussion above regarding 
showing this pane and saving the layout information</li>

<br />


<li><b>To add an attribute</b>, click in the 'Add More' box and type the 
attribute name. To give an attribute a type, follow the name by a colon, 
and then one of the Umple types (Integer, String, Date, Time, Boolean or 
the name of an Umple class. You can click on an attribute at any time to 
change its name or type, or you can edit the attribute in the textual 
(left) pane. You can add a whole series of attributes by just hitting 
return after each one and typing the next one.</li>

<br />

<li><b>To delete an attribute</b>, click on the little red X next to it.</li>

<br />


<li><b>To add a generalization</b> (an inheritance relationship between 
classes), click on Tools/Generalization in the center pane, and then click 
first on the subclass, then the superclass. If you double-click on 
Tools/Generalization you can then hook up a subclass to its parent, and 
then the parent to a higher-level parent, etc. Press escape to cancel the 
process of adding generalizations..</li>

<br />

<li><b>To add an association</b> (a relationship that describes how 
instances of one class are to be connected to instances of another at run 
time), click on Tools/Association in the center pane. Then click on one 
class to be connected, and then the second class. By default, the 
multiplicity of a new association is many-to-many (* -- *). To change 
this, or to add a name to the assocation, you currently have to edit the 
Umple code in the left (textual) pane.</li>

<br />

<li><b>To adjust the location of an association</b>, in other words how it 
is connected to each class, hover over the association until you see 
little squares at its ends, then click. The squares should change to a 
darker colour. Select a little squares and move it to a new location on 
the class. If an association crosses a class's border, just move the class 
a little. Note that the location of the association end is saved with the 
layout information of the diagram.</li>


<br />

<li><b>To delete a class, generalization or association</b> click on 
Tools/Delete and then select the item to delete.</li>

<br />

<li><b>To hide the 'add more' line in each class</b>, select Options/Photo 
Ready from the centre pane. You can also click on any class to adjust its 
size a little. UmpleOnline is an excellent tool for preparing nice-looking 
diagrams ready for publication.</li>

<br />

<li><b>To hide the graphical canvas</b>, uncheck Options/Layout Editor. 
Then you can just work with the textual Umple in the left pane.</li>

<br />

<li><b>To adjust the size of the canvas</b> select 'Smaller' or 'Larger' 
from the Options.</li>

</ul>


<p><b>Bottom Pane: Generated Results</b></p>

<ul>
<li>This user manual is under development. Details will be added later.</li>
</ul>


<p>We will later on add instructions about how to use the Eclipse plugin.</p>

<p><b><i>Next topic if reading in sequence:</i></b> Structure of Umple Code.</p>
